SpeechT5 blog post (#824)
huggingface/blog: speecht5.md

---
title: "Speech Synthesis, Recognition, and More With SpeechT5"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/speecht5/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: Matthijs
---

# Speech Synthesis, Recognition, and More With SpeechT5

<!-- {blog_metadata} -->
<!-- {authors} -->

We’re happy to announce that SpeechT5 is now available in 🤗 Transformers, an open-source library that offers easy-to-use implementations of state-of-the-art machine learning models.

SpeechT5 was originally described in the paper [SpeechT5: Unified-Modal Encoder-Decoder Pre-Training for Spoken Language Processing](https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.07205) by Microsoft Research Asia. The [official checkpoints](https://github.com/microsoft/SpeechT5) published by the paper’s authors are available on the Hugging Face Hub.

> If you want to jump right in, here are some demos on 🤗 Spaces:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to jump right in, here are some demos on Spaces:
```

- [Speech Synthesis (TTS)](https://huggingface.co/spaces/Matthijs/speecht5-tts-demo)
- [Voice Conversion](https://huggingface.co/spaces/Matthijs/speecht5-vc-demo)

> - [Automatic Speech Recognition](https://huggingface.co/spaces/Matthijs/speecht5-asr-demo)

Reviewer: FYI you can also embed Space demos in the blog post if there's interest, see https://github.com/huggingface/blog/blob/main/spaces_3dmoljs.md?plain=1#L43

> ## Introduction

Reviewer: Maybe worth adding a small Table of Contents

SpeechT5 is not one, not two, but three kinds of speech models in one architecture.

It can do:

- **speech-to-text** for automatic speech recognition or speaker identification,
- **text-to-speech** to synthesize audio, and
- **speech-to-speech** for converting between different voices or performing speech enhancement.

> The main idea behind SpeechT5 is to pre-train a single model on a mixture of text-to-speech, speech-to-text, text-to-text, and speech-to-speech data. This way, the model learns from text and speech at the same time. The result of this pre-training approach is a model that has a **unified space** of hidden representations shared by both text and speech.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main idea behind SpeechT5 is to pre-train a single model on a mixture of text-to-speech, speech-to-text, text-to-text, and speech-to-speech data. This way, the model learns from text and speech simultaneously. The result of this pre-training approach is a model that has a **unified space** of hidden representations shared by both text and speech.
```

At the heart of SpeechT5 is a regular **Transformer encoder-decoder** model. Just like any other Transformer, the encoder-decoder network models a sequence-to-sequence transformation using hidden representations. This Transformer backbone is the same for all SpeechT5 tasks.

To make it possible for the same Transformer to deal with both text and speech data, so-called **pre-nets** and **post-nets** were added. It is the job of the pre-net to convert the input text or speech into the hidden representations used by the Transformer. The post-net takes the outputs from the Transformer and turns them into text or speech again.

A figure illustrating SpeechT5’s architecture is depicted below (taken from the [original paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.07205)).

<div align="center">
    <img alt="SpeechT5 architecture diagram" src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/speecht5/architecture.jpg"/>
</div>

> During pre-training, all of the pre-nets and post-nets are used simultaneously. After pre-training, the entire encoder-decoder backbone is fine-tuned on a single task. Such a fine-tuned model only use the pre-nets and post-nets that are specific to the given task. For example, to use SpeechT5 for text-to-speech, you’d swap in the text encoder pre-net for the text inputs, and the speech decoder pre and post-nets for the speech outputs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During pre-training, all of the pre-nets and post-nets are used simultaneously. After pre-training, the entire encoder-decoder backbone is fine-tuned on a single task. Such a fine-tuned model only uses the pre-nets and post-nets specific to the given task. For example, to use SpeechT5 for text-to-speech, you’d swap in the text encoder pre-net for the text inputs and the speech decoder pre and post-nets for the speech outputs.
```

Note: Even though the fine-tuned models start out using the same set of weights from the shared pre-trained model, the final versions are all quite different in the end. You can’t take a fine-tuned ASR model and swap out the pre-nets and post-net to get a working TTS model, for example. SpeechT5 is flexible, but not *that* flexible.

## Text-to-speech

SpeechT5 is the **first text-to-speech model** we’ve added to 🤗 Transformers, and we plan to add more TTS models in the near future.

For the TTS task, the model uses the following pre-nets and post-nets:

- **Text encoder pre-net.** A text embedding layer that maps text tokens to the hidden representations that the encoder expects. Similar to what happens in an NLP model such as BERT.

> - **Speech decoder pre-net.** This takes as input a log mel spectrogram and uses a sequence of linear layers to compress the spectrogram into hidden representations. This design is taken from the Tacotron 2 TTS model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Speech decoder pre-net.** This takes a log mel spectrogram as input and uses a sequence of linear layers to compress the spectrogram into hidden representations. This design is taken from the Tacotron 2 TTS model.
```

- **Speech decoder post-net.** This predicts a residual to add to the output spectrogram and is used to refine the results, also from Tacotron 2.

The architecture of the fine-tuned model looks like the following.

<div align="center">
    <img alt="SpeechT5 architecture for text-to-speech" src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/speecht5/tts.jpg"/>
</div>

Here is a complete example of how to use the SpeechT5 text-to-speech model to synthesize speech.

> First we load the [fine-tuned model](https://huggingface.co/microsoft/speecht5_tts) from the hub, along with the processor object that is used for tokenization and feature extraction. The class we’ll use is `SpeechT5ForTextToSpeech`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, we load the [fine-tuned model](https://huggingface.co/microsoft/speecht5_tts) from the Hub, along with the processor object used for tokenization and feature extraction. The class we’ll use is `SpeechT5ForTextToSpeech`.
```

```python

> from transformers import SpeechT5Processor, SpeechT5ForTextToSpeech

Reviewer: This is not in the last release yet, right? Maybe add 

```
!pip install git+https://github.com/huggingface/transformers.git
``` 

first until this is released

Reviewer: And also sentencepiece

processor = SpeechT5Processor.from_pretrained("microsoft/speecht5_tts")
model = SpeechT5ForTextToSpeech.from_pretrained("microsoft/speecht5_tts")
```

Next, tokenize the input text.

```python
inputs = processor(text="Don't count the days, make the days count.", return_tensors="pt")
```

> The SpeechT5 TTS model is not limited to creating speech for a single speaker. Instead, it uses so-called **speaker embeddings** that capture the characteristics of a particular speaker’s voice. We’ll load such a speaker embedding from a dataset on the 🤗 Hub.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SpeechT5 TTS model is not limited to creating a speech for a single speaker. Instead, it uses so-called **speaker embeddings** that capture a particular speaker’s voice characteristics. We’ll load such a speaker embedding from a dataset on the Hub.
```

```python
from datasets import load_dataset
embeddings_dataset = load_dataset("Matthijs/cmu-arctic-xvectors", split="validation")

import torch
speaker_embeddings = torch.tensor(embeddings_dataset[7306]["xvector"]).unsqueeze(0)
```

The speaker embedding is a tensor of shape (1, 512). This particular speaker embedding describes a female voice. The embeddings were obtained from the [CMU ARCTIC](http://www.festvox.org/cmu_arctic/) dataset using [this script](https://huggingface.co/mechanicalsea/speecht5-vc/blob/main/manifest/utils/prep_cmu_arctic_spkemb.py), but any X-Vector embedding should work.

Now we can tell the model to generate the speech, given the input tokens and the speaker embedding.

```python
spectrogram = model.generate_speech(inputs["input_ids"], speaker_embeddings)
```

> This outputs a tensor of shape (140, 80) containing a log mel spectrogram. The first dimension is the sequence length, and it may vary between runs as the speech decoder pre-net always applies dropout to the input sequence. This adds a bit of random variability to the generated speech.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This outputs a tensor of shape (140, 80) containing a log mel spectrogram. The first dimension is the sequence length, which may vary between runs as the speech decoder pre-net always applies dropout to the input sequence. This adds a bit of random variability to the generated speech.
```

> To convert the predicted log mel spectrogram into an actual speech waveform, we need a **vocoder**. In theory you can use any vocoder that works on 80-bin mel spectrograms, but for convenience we’ve provided one in Transformers that is based on HiFi-GAN. The [weights for this vocoder](https://huggingface.co/mechanicalsea/speecht5-tts), as well as the weights for the fine-tuned TTS model, were kindly provided by the original authors of SpeechT5.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To convert the predicted log mel spectrogram into an actual speech waveform, we need a **vocoder**. In theory, you can use any vocoder that works on 80-bin mel spectrograms, but for convenience, we’ve provided one in Transformers based on HiFi-GAN. The [weights for this vocoder](https://huggingface.co/mechanicalsea/speecht5-tts), as well as the weights for the fine-tuned TTS model, were kindly provided by the original authors of SpeechT5.
```

Loading the vocoder is as easy as any other 🤗 Transformers model.

```python
from transformers import SpeechT5HifiGan
vocoder = SpeechT5HifiGan.from_pretrained("microsoft/speecht5_hifigan")
```

To make audio from the spectrogram, do the following:

```python
with torch.no_grad():
    speech = vocoder(spectrogram)
```

We’ve also provided a shortcut so you don’t need the intermediate step of making the spectrogram. When you pass the vocoder object into `generate_speech`, it directly outputs the speech waveform.

```python
speech = model.generate_speech(inputs["input_ids"], speaker_embeddings, vocoder=vocoder)
```

And finally, save the speech waveform to a file. The sample rate used by SpeechT5 is always 16 kHz.

```python
import soundfile as sf
sf.write("tts_example.wav", speech.numpy(), samplerate=16000)
```

The output sounds like this ([download audio](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/speecht5/tts_example.wav)):

<audio controls>
  <source src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/speecht5/tts_example.wav" type="audio/wav">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>

> That’s it for the TTS model! Key to making this sound good is to use the right speaker embeddings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That’s it for the TTS model! The key to making this sound good is to use the right speaker embeddings.
```

> You can play with an [interactive demo](https://huggingface.co/spaces/Matthijs/speecht5-tts-demo) on 🤗 Spaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can play with an [interactive demo](https://huggingface.co/spaces/Matthijs/speecht5-tts-demo) on Spaces.
```

> You can play with an [interactive demo](https://huggingface.co/spaces/Matthijs/speecht5-tts-demo) on 🤗 Spaces.

Reviewer: Maybe this is a good place to embed the demo

## Speech-to-speech for voice conversion

Conceptually, doing speech-to-speech modeling with SpeechT5 is the same as text-to-speech. Simply swap out the text encoder pre-net for the speech encoder pre-net. The rest of the model stays the same.

<div align="center">
    <img alt="SpeechT5 architecture for speech-to-speech" src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/speecht5/s2s.jpg"/>
</div>

The **speech encoder pre-net** is the same as the feature encoding module from [wav2vec 2.0](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/model_doc/wav2vec2). It consists of convolution layers that downsample the input waveform into a sequence of audio frame representations.

> As an example of a speech-to-speech task, the authors of SpeechT5 provide a [fine-tuned checkpoint](https://huggingface.co/microsoft/speecht5_vc) for doing voice conversion. To use this, first load the model from the hub. Note that the model class now is `SpeechT5ForSpeechToSpeech`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an example of a speech-to-speech task, the authors of SpeechT5 provide a [fine-tuned checkpoint](https://huggingface.co/microsoft/speecht5_vc) for doing voice conversion. To use this, first load the model from the Hub. Note that the model class now is `SpeechT5ForSpeechToSpeech`.
```

```python
from transformers import SpeechT5Processor, SpeechT5ForSpeechToSpeech

processor = SpeechT5Processor.from_pretrained("microsoft/speecht5_vc")
model = SpeechT5ForSpeechToSpeech.from_pretrained("microsoft/speecht5_vc")
```

> We will need some speech audio to use as input. For the purpose of this example, we’ll load the audio from a small speech dataset on the 🤗 Hub. You can also load your own speech waveforms, as long as they are mono and use a sampling rate of 16 kHz. The samples from the dataset we’re using here are already in this format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will need some speech audio to use as input. For the purpose of this example, we’ll load the audio from a small speech dataset on the Hub. You can also load your own speech waveforms, as long as they are mono and use a sampling rate of 16 kHz. The samples from the dataset we’re using here are already in this format.
```

```python
from datasets import load_dataset
dataset = load_dataset("hf-internal-testing/librispeech_asr_demo", "clean", split="validation")
dataset = dataset.sort("id")
example = dataset[40]
```

Next, preprocess the audio to put it in the format that the model expects.

```python
sampling_rate = dataset.features["audio"].sampling_rate
inputs = processor(audio=example["audio"]["array"], sampling_rate=sampling_rate, return_tensors="pt")
```

As with the TTS model, we’ll need speaker embeddings. These describe what the target voice sounds like.

```python

> import torch

Reviewer: For things that you already imported before, I feel it's fine not to re import them unless you want to make it very explicit. No strong opinion!

<audio controls>
  <source src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/speecht5/speech_original.wav" type="audio/wav">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>

The converted voice ([download](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/speecht5/speech_converted.wav)):

<audio controls>
  <source src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/speecht5/speech_converted.wav" type="audio/wav">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>

Note that the converted audio in this example cuts off before the end of the sentence. This might be due to the pause between the two sentences, causing SpeechT5 to (wrongly) predict that the end of the sequence has been reached. Try it with another example, you’ll find that often the conversion is correct but sometimes it stops prematurely.

You can play with an [interactive demo here](https://huggingface.co/spaces/Matthijs/speecht5-vc-demo). 🔥

## Speech-to-text for automatic speech recognition

The ASR model uses the following pre-nets and post-net:

> - **Speech encoder pre-net.** This is the same pre-net as was used by the speech-to-speech model, and consists of the CNN feature encoder layers from wav2vec 2.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - **Speech encoder pre-net.** This is the same pre-net used by the speech-to-speech model and consists of the CNN feature encoder layers from wav2vec 2.0.
```

- **Text decoder pre-net.** Similar to the encoder pre-net used by the TTS model, this maps text tokens into the hidden representations using an embedding layer. (During pre-training, these embeddings are shared between the text encoder and decoder pre-nets.)

- **Text decoder post-net.** This is the simplest of them all and consists of a single linear layer that projects the hidden representations to probabilities over the vocabulary.

The architecture of the fine-tuned model looks like the following.

<div align="center">
    <img alt="SpeechT5 architecture for speech-to-text" src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/speecht5/asr.jpg"/>
</div>

If you’ve tried any of the other 🤗 Transformers speech recognition models before, you’ll find SpeechT5 just as easy to use. The quickest way to get started is by using a pipeline.

```python
from transformers import pipeline
generator = pipeline(task="automatic-speech-recognition", model="microsoft/speecht5_asr")
```

> As speech audio we’ll use the same input as in the previous section, but any audio file will work, as the pipeline automatically converts the audio into the correct format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As speech audio, we’ll use the same input as in the previous section, but any audio file will work, as the pipeline automatically converts the audio into the correct format.
```

```python
from datasets import load_dataset
dataset = load_dataset("hf-internal-testing/librispeech_asr_demo", "clean", split="validation")
dataset = dataset.sort("id")
example = dataset[40]
```

Now we can ask the pipeline to process the speech and generate a text transcription.

```python
transcription = generator(example["audio"]["array"])
```

Printing the transcription gives:

```text
a man said to the universe sir i exist
```

That sounds exactly right! The tokenizer used by SpeechT5 is very basic and works on the character level. The ASR model will therefore not output any punctuation or capitalization.

> Of course it’s also possible to use the model class directly. First load the [fine-tuned model](https://huggingface.co/microsoft/speecht5_asr) and the processor object. The class is now `SpeechT5ForSpeechToText`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of course it’s also possible to use the model class directly. First, load the [fine-tuned model](https://huggingface.co/microsoft/speecht5_asr) and the processor object. The class is now `SpeechT5ForSpeechToText`.
```
